- [**Introduction**](#introduction)
  - [**The problem of understanding the photographs**](#the-problem-of-understanding-the-photographs)
    - [**Subject in a photograph**](#subject-in-a-photograph)
    - [**Realism is photography**](#realism-is-photography)
    - [**A medium based on multiples**](#a-medium-based-on-multiples)
      - [**Marketing**](#marketing)
    - [**Historical backgrounds**](#historical-backgrounds)
    - [**Photographic genres**](#photographic-genres)
    - [**Photographers' intentions**](#photographers-intentions)
- [**Photography's double invention**](#photographys-double-invention)
  - [**First invention**](#first-invention)
  - [**Second invention**](#second-invention)
- [**The expanding domain**](#the-expanding-domain)
- [**Photography and modernity**](#photography-and-modernity)
  - [**The great divide**](#the-great-divide)
    - [**Mass media and mass markets**](#mass-media-and-mass-markets)
    - [**The challenge for art photography**](#the-challenge-for-art-photography)
      - [**Naturalistic photography**](#naturalistic-photography)
    - [**Pictorialism**](#pictorialism)
  - [**Modern life**](#modern-life)
    - [**The modern city**](#the-modern-city)
      - [**Social reform photography**](#social-reform-photography)
    - [**Science and photography**](#science-and-photography)
      - [**The photography of movement**](#the-photography-of-movement)
    - [**Photography, social science, and exploration**](#photography-social-science-and-exploration)
      - [**Criminal likenesses**](#criminal-likenesses)
- [**A new vision**](#a-new-vision)
- [**Through the lense of culture**](#through-the-lense-of-culture)
- [**Convergences**](#convergences)

# **Introduction**

The concept of light writing, which is the basic meaning of the word 'photography', is a starting point for understanding photography. At the same time, it is important to appreciate that photography has never been one thing. In 1839, there were 3 types of photography: Daguerreotype which was a one-of-a-kind image, and two ways of producing photographs on paper invented by Talbot, one of which was called photogenic drawing. These two ways had the potential to be made into _negatives_, from which additional copies could be produced. Throughout its history, photography rapidly changed its technological means, though each type was a variant of light writing. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiii*]

Even before photography was presented to the world, the medium was grasped through the imagination and prior experience of those who read and heard about it. Soon, many different uses for photography appeared. Within a decade of its presentation to the world, photography was enmeshed in modernity while it helped to shape the modern condition in which knowledge is increasingly visualized. By 1852, photography was being used in such an extended domain that one concluded 'photography is at the same time a science, an art, and an industry.' [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiii*]

Photography has always been cross-diciplinary. Photographers who used the medium for artistic expression, record-keeping, journalism, scientific documentation, family history, or other diverse photographic endeavors reached beyond their immediate fields for inspiration and information. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiii*]

By 1850, photography was immersed in social debates and deeply at odds with itself. It was conjectured to be variously an art, a danger to art, a science, a revolutionary means of education, a mindless machine for rendering, and a threat to social order. Since photography appeared to be a relatively cheap way to disseminate information, it seemed to augur either a moder, bloodless, egalitarian revolution, or a social degeneration in which viewers would glut themselves with pleasing but trivial images of reality. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiii*]

The reproducibility of photography renders the medium unusually available. Early in its history, photographic images were regularly displayed in shop windows and shown by photographic societies. In the late 19th century, when technology allowed photographs to be printed directly in books and magainzes, the age of mass media began to take shape. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiv*]

The basic relationship of the photograph and the viewer rests on a few elements: **informed observation**, **research**, and **contemplation**. Estelle Jussim wisely counseled that students of photography's past and present must 'expect complexity'. The richness and reward of photographic study comes from exploring the comprehensiveness of the medium. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiv*]

## **The problem of understanding the photographs**

Understanding photographs is different from looking at them. Understanding a photograph requires time and willingness to set aside the rapid-fire judgments applied to imagtes in the stream of daily life. Thought, research, and an occasional revision of initial imporessions are necessary, and these take more time than a brief look. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiv*]

### **Subject in a photograph**

Even when the subject of a photograph is apparent, it is useful to recall that photorgaphs have many and sometimes overlapping storylines. The subject of a photogaraph has many facets. Subject includes, but reaches beyond, who or what is pictured in a photograph. Of course, associations are not permanent, but circumscribed by time, place, and audiences. Moreover, the subject of a photograph is inflected by elements of composition. Though it is often unfeasible to know how the image was treated in the darkroom or with photo-editing software, it is still necessary to remember that the photographer may make the picture after taking the picture. All of these components must be appreciated as choices made by the photographer, sometimes in an instant. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiv*]

### **Realism is photography**

Realism, the depiction of the external world as it appears to the eye, has long been a powerful pulse in Western art, ranging from Roman portraits to Dutch paintings of household scenes. But the destinctive realism of photography does not often fit into various historic moments of fine-art realism. The camera seemed to have the unique ability to soak up large quantities of visual detail. Therefore, its images were judged to be far less subjective than those made by other methods. Since photography was thought not to have an inherent style of its own, it quickly became synonymous with the making and collecting of objective images. Although the pursuit of photographic evidence in science and law is nearly as old as the medium, the underlying concepts of evidence and documentary expression have been frequently challenged. These contests of meaning, and all such disputes, are as much part of photography's history as are its technical acoomplishements. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xiv-xv*]

### **A medium based on multiples**

The reception of photographic images is shaped by the fact that photography has been, for the most part, a medium based on multiples. The sense that there is one original that exsists in only one place usually does not apply to photography. Prinst made by the photographers are sometimes valued more than prints made by an assistant or after the photographer's death, but to understand photography is to understand that the photogarpher was probably thinking about multiple images when the picture was taken. Sequencing photographs, whether for an exhibition, a book, a newspaper article, or a website, is an ongoing aspect of photography. Thinking in series may be done for a short period, or over a lifetime. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xv*]

#### **Marketing**

Marketing also plays a role in multiple images created by photography. Caleton Watkins used a special camera to make negatives from which he created Mammoth prints of the American West, usually bought by prosperous collectors as showpieces. Yet he also made smaller, more affordable photographs for tourist albums. **The same image was understood differently in separate contexts.** [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xv*]

### **Historical backgrounds**

A photograph may show what an important event looked like to an observer standing near the camera, but it cannot indicate the historical background. To understand why a photograph of an event looks the way it does, it is necessary to look beyond the frame and to ask how the picture relates to what happened. For instance, in war photography from late in WW2 to the present day, portraits of individual soldiers have been more popular with the public than images of generals and battles. To appreciate that situation, one has to look at **public perception** of modern warfare, and at how prior pictures in all media, especially in **mass media**, have shaped pictures of soldiers. Yet however widespread a photographic approach may seem, it is likely that images also possess a particular local resonance that cannot be generalized. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xv*]

### **Photographic genres**

Photographic genres have been very porous. Art photography has influenced newspaper imagery and vice versa. Aspects of experimental art photography - for example, the odd and abrupt angles of Russian photography after the Revolution or collages created between WW1 and WW2 - were adapted for advertising and documentary work. Scientific photographs of phenomena not seen by the human eye have been displayed for their aesthetic qualities, not their factual content. In current and historic photographic practice, photographers have blended visual and literary sources to create photofictions. In the recent years, ordinary snapshots have influenced art and photojournalism. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xv*]

### **Photographers' intentions**

Photographers' intentions are an amalgam of visual and topical possibilities. Aesthetic experimentaion and self-expression are not limited to art photography, but encompass all genres, including amateur and casual photography. A photographer's influences are not restricted to the visual arts. Although painting has regularly inflected photographic practice, literature, film, and mass media have also played significant roles in the field. Pinning down an image-maker's influences is as hard as analyzing how any individual comes to do and make certain things. Autobiographies, biographies, and artists' statements are valuable, but a life, like an image, always seems to evade exhaustive description. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xv*]

**John Berger once said: "The relationship between what we see and what we know is never settled." The meaning of photographs shift over time and in the appreciation of different audiences. Understanding photographs can never be complete.** [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, xv*]

# **Photography's double invention**

## **First invention**

The first invention of photography was during a period of largely concealed and scattered technological development, from the turn of the 18th century to 1839. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 1*]

The invention of photography did not depend directly on the impetus of a particular visual tradition, or even on a demonstrable social need. Instead, the climate of congenial attitudes toward toward material progress, research, and innovation encouraged its conception. Around 1800, Western European countries began to define **government's role** as fostering economic development through the expansion of industry and commerce. **Social progress** was understood to flow from the intellectual freedom of **individuals** seeking to solve scientific problems that would lead to practical applications. Those with the most to gain from this attitude toward change were the _educated classes_, as well as entrepreneurs, manufacturers, and enlightened landlords - people making up a **growing middle class** whose status was based on their **achievements and earnings**. The petite bourgeoisie, or lower middle class, also benefited from the outlook that **linked achievement to ability**. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 1*]

The primary elements of the photographic process began to come together and were experimented with in an era when practical, commercially feasible applications of scientific experiments were encouraged by **national policy** and **cultural values**. Independant entrepreneurs and business people started to believe that their investments in research might be awarded. Much of the history of early experiments in photography shows cultural attitudes prompting **resourceful individuals** to resolve practical problems and technical puzzles. In 1839, when the medium was disclosed, the industrializing world eagerly began to explore how it might be applied to **portraiture**, **record-keeping**, **political persuasion**, **academic investigation**, and **travel accounts**. Ten years later, the photographic subjects and applications began a swift proliferation that constituted a second invention, based partially on the **inclinations of individual photographers**, but also on the **needs of society**. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 1*]

## **Second invention**

The second invention of photography was in the decades after its disclosure, when it would be ceaselessly reinvented by the social uses to which it was put and the cultural dialogue surrounding it. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 1*]

The second invention of photography was based partially on the inclinations of individual photographers, but also on the needs of society. The market for portraits expanded, historical events began to be photographed, science and social science took up the medium, artists and artistically inclined photographers used the camera for personal expression and aesthetic exploration. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 1*]

# **The expanding domain**

In an 1857 article, **Lady Elizabeth Eastlake**, who marveled on the growth of photography since its disclosure to the world in 1839, wrote "Since then, photography has become a household word and household want; it is used alike by art, sience, by love, business, and justice; it is found in the most sumptuous salon, and in the dingiest attic." Photographic images were displayed in shop windows, and newspapers used photographic sources for their illustrations. At the same time, with the continued spread of photography, the development of new applications, and the **intense commercialization** of the medium in the late 1850s, amazement at its ability to capture appearances declined. As photography became more **commonplace**, the medium's **societal and artistic impact** was more frequently debated. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 76*]

The rapid commercialization of photography sprang from the interaction of **social needs** and **techincal inventions**. The convenience of the _Collodion_, or wet-plate, and the resulting **availablitiy of low-priced prints** stimulated the market for portraits of family, friends, and public figures. As different technologies speeded up communications, commerce, and travel, the **desire** for portraits and views kept pace. For instance, in the months leading up to the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861, the market for inexpensive portraits of people in the news grew at an unparalleled rate. Also, war and topical photography began to increase the public's demand for recent **images of important events**. Photographs from the Crimean War, from the Indian Mutiny, and the Americal Civil War were shown in galleries. Views of biblical and exotic places were alse demanded. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 76*]

At the same time, the growing market for low-priced photographs intensified the contrast between the so-called "cheap johns" who mass produced these, and those who hoped to elevate photography to the status of **fine art**. By the mid-1850s, members of the photographic society in England worried that members who made their living as photographers would degrade the society, and some attepted to pass a rule that would exclude from the society's exhibitions any photograph that had hung in a shop window. Ultimately, **High Art Photogarphy** was brough into being by photographers and critics concerned to link the new medium to the **betterment of individuals**. It put photography in the service of **public morality** by trying to make the medium ennoble and instruct its viewers in proper conduct. The perceived divide between **popular and art photogarphy**, begun in the middle of the 19th century, lasted almost one hundred years. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 76*]

# **Photography and modernity**

As a machine, the camera was aligned with the **first industrial revolution**. Electricity powered the second industrial revolution, which also included: the telephone; the radio; the combine; automatic looms in the textile industry; the adding machine; the widespread use of typewriters; and the electric light bulb, together with power plants and the network delivering electrical power. Many late 19th-century writers saw electricity as a metaphore for **rapid and powerful change**; the camera gave way to the dynamo. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 163*]

Photography was linked to the expansion of industrialization in other ways. Increasingly, the production of multiple photographs resembled that of the late 19th-century factory, which was coupled to national and international markets. **Postcards** and **stereographs** were mass produced for new audiences. Photogarphy was subjected to the **division of labor**, not just in the small factories that made stereographs and postcards, but in the experience of the amateur snapshooter. When the Kodak camera hit the market in 1888, it separated the act of taking photogarphs from the process of making photographs. Instead of processing photographs in the home darkroom, users sent the camera and film to Kodak, which developed and printed the image. Perhaps the greatest correlation between photography and the second industrialization was found in the production of illustrated newspapers and magazines. **Half-tone printing** allowed images and text to be printed together on high-speed presses, which, in turn, fostered the production of inexpensive daily illustrated newspapers, some of whose income came for photographically illustrated advertisements. These highly competitive pulications also promoted themselves by publishing topical and celebrity photographs. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 163*]

The perceived **vulgarity of mass culture** and the excitement of **modern art** combined to encourage photographers interested in art and personal expression to create a separate aesthetic, supported by publications, galleries, and exclusive societies. **Optical realism**, which was photography's major asset in mass media, was targeted in the European art movements that influenced art photogarphy, as well as in some of the scientific applications of the medium. The photogarphy of movement and the X-ray undermined the certainty of human perception. At the end of the era, the extensive death and brutality of WW1 brought into question both the social responsibility of science and the aspirations of art. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 163*]

## **The great divide**

By 1880, photography had been quietly absorbed into the texture of everyday life. In the late 1880s, there were more than 60 photographic journals and 161 photographic societies around the world. The increase in amateur photography prompted newspaper editors to run camera columns that served the people sometimes jokingly called 'fotophiends.' An article in the New York times compared the **camera epidemic** to the cholera epidemic in Europe. The large photographic firms and news agencies in the developed countries continued to expand sophisticated networks for the accumulation and dissemination of images worldwide. The period witnessed an **explosion of vernacular photography**. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 165*]

At the same time, art photographers were compelled to engage **modern life**. Some believed that art photography should take its lead from contemporary scientific findings. Others rejected science as hazardous to the timeless values of art and to the need for self-expression through art forms. Many felt that mass-media photography was not only **vulgar** and sensational, but also a symbol of the cheapening of modern life. Just as the fine arts had inspired some Victorians to devise High Art photography, turn-of-the-century photographers contrived **Pictorialism** - that is, a kind of photography that rejected industrialization for evocative, often hand-painted photographic images. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 165*]

### **Mass media and mass markets**

During the vast expansion and societal absorbtion of photography, there was no particular moment or event to mark the point at which **the medium fundamentally altered the experience of modern life**. Instead, the transformation was expressed in multiple, interrelated **technological developments** during the 1880s, that occured in response to the immense **demand** for photogarphs and the voracious information systems in Western society. Experiments in photomechanical processes led to the development of the **half-tone** process, which allowed publications to reproduce photogarphic images directly, rather than through engravings. During the 1890s, it became cheaper, easier, and faster to use half-tones than to hire artists to make sketches, or to translate photographs into engravings. Spurred by advertising and illustrated periodicals, millions of half-tone images were produced. Along with the stereograph and the postcard, the half-tone invested modern life with visual information to an unprecedented degree. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 165*]

The speed at which photographs could be reproduced with text, combined with the fast pace of urban life, altered newspapers, which had previously consisted mostly of columns of text with occasional line drawings, engravings, and advertisements. Specialized press photogarphers, agencies, and networks emerged, and pages were redesigned to include more photogarphs in place of descriptive text. Rather than wait for news to happen, news photographers were sent around the world to places where incidents were likely to occur. **Political figures** were regularly photographed and the pictures were rushed to press by land or sea, since, unlike text, they could not yet be cheaply wired to newspapers over telephone lines. A specific date was not appended to many news photographs, perhaps because of the time-lag between taking a picture and publishing it (6 days to 2 months). [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 165-166*]

In the 1880s andd 1890s, many periodicals presented political news together with entertainment listings, social happenings, and society reporting. Non-news, human interest articles, and reports on the doings of celebrities increased and were accompanied by photographs. For news and feature stories, editors sought unusual, candid, or dramatic pictures. The images were routinely cropped, retouched, and sequenced without the photogarpher's prior knowledge or permission, because the photographers' output was considered to be the property of the paper. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 166-167*]

The popularity of illustrated newspapers spawned new daily and weekly newspapers, as well as magazines, all of which engaged in intense rivalry for **original pictures**. The competition for pictures to sell to the press spurred photogarphers to invade the privacy of public figures. At the same time, public figures and celebrities often orchestrated events for the cameras that followed them. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 167*]

**Advertising** began using photographs to sell an ever-increasing number of products. Along with the growth of department stores, catalog shopping, and national advertising campaigns, photogarphy's own **association with modernity** gave products cachet and fostered a **culture of display**. In the cities, **window shopping** became a Sunday afternoon activity. The multifaceted increase in merchandising gave photogarphers opportunities to enlarge their practices. Because **women** were increasingly the modern family's designated shopper, they were thought to have an instinct for what products and promotions would succeed in the market. Consequently, women were often sought for jobs as copy-writers and photogarphers. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 167*]

The invention of dry plates made photogarphy faster and easier. In contrast to the cumbersome wet-plate process, mass-manufactured dry plates did not need to be prepared and processed close to the time of exposure. James Lawrence Breese concisely summed up the impact of the new process: "The photographic artist has a wider range at the present time than ever before, for the modern dry plate, so rapid in its action, permits photography from the rigging of a ship in motion, as well as on the busiest thoroughfare of the metropolis." In 1839, exposures could take several minutes; by the end of the 19th century, exposure time was reduced to 1/5000 of a second. In addition, early photographic chemicals were not sensitive to the full range of colors in the natural world. They rendered some shades of red and blue as dark black. But by 1900, the responsiveness of black-and-white film to the range of colors was perfected and applied to the dry plate, making it better able to reproduce tonal variation in monochromatic prints. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 168*]

Yielding faster exposure times throughout the 1880s, dry plates worked well with new, smaller, and more portable cameras, called hand cameras. In part, the short exposure time of the dry plate led to the design of camera shutters, which could open and close more quickly than the hand could remove and replace a lens cap. The dry plate allowed photographers to record movement, and permitted them greater mobility and anonymity. Because the image registered so quickly, the photographer did not need a tripod. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 168*]

In addition, an elaborate process for making color photographs called Autochrome was developed in 1904 by Lumiere brothers, inventors of the motion-picture projector in 1895. It involved depositin tiny potato-starch granules, dyed red-orange, green, and blue, on a glass plate, which was then coated with the light-sensitive emulsion used for black-and-white photogarphs. The grains served as color filters and the resulting image was a unique direct-positive photograph. Basically, the autochrome was a slide, requiring light to be passed through it so viewers could look at the image. It remained the most advanced method for making color photographs until Kodachrome was introduced in 1935. Subject to fading, expensive to create, not capable of being duplicated, the autochrome enjoyed a vogue with amateur photographers. Despite its drawbacks, French banker-financier Albert Kahn funded an effort using black-and-white photography and the autochrome process to create a visual record of everyday life around the globe. It initiated in 1912 and ended during the Great Depression. It was called Archives of the Planet, and contained 4000 black-and-white photographs, approximately 100 hours of film, and 72000 autochromes, the largest of its kind in the world. Kahn believed that when his collection was viewed by people it would motivate them to embrace human differences and, thereby, contribute to world peace. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 168*]

### **The challenge for art photography**

On the occasion of photography's fiftieth anniversary in 1889, American artist J. Wells Champney wrote an article surveying the familiar list of its social and technological accomplishments in the fields of science, anthropology, criminology, and military applications. "As an aid to science, as a recorder, as a duplicator, photography has helped advance civilization. Yet it has failed to occupy the place it may yet hold as a means for expressing original throught of a fine order." At the turn to the 20th century, more people came to believe that a modern art must evolve at a pace and with an inventiveness similar to those of science and technology. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 170*]

#### **Naturalistic photography**

Peter Henry Emerson, had taken up eagerly the perceived challenge of science to art and art photography. He insisted that in the modern world, science was the only authentic basis for art and photogarphy. Just as the French novelist Emile Zola had adopted the scientific method and outlook of the doctor Claude Bernard, so Emerson seized on the ideas of German scientist Hermann von Helmholtz, whose studies of the human eye's range of focus he took as instructive for photography. Both Zola and Emerson attempted to align art with the cuttin edge of science, and to make it part of the modern world. Speaking to the Camera Club of London in March 1886, Emerson declared that "the days of metaphysics are over." [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 170*]

In his most important theoretical work, Naturalistic Photography (1889), Emerson expounded his theory of photography. He rejected the idea of art as primarily a vehicle for personal and emotional expression. While maintaining that the artist was a person of special character and ability, he derided works of the imagination as untrue. His own notion of naturalism was based on contemporary science, not art theory, notably on Helmholtz's idea that "perfect artistic painting is only reached when we have succeeded in imitating the action of light upon the eye." At a time when technical improvements enabled photographers to make sharper pictures, Emerson denied that the camera could make art by merely transcribing physical reality. Instead, he argued that the artist should translate exactly how the eye sees, concluding that the photographer should focus on the main subject of a scene, allowing the periphery and the distance to become indistinct; a technique known as differential or selective focus. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 171*]

Much of Emerson's photography was done on the Norfolk Broads, an area in eastern England where industrialization had not penetrated to the degree that it had in other parts of the country. There, Emerson found rural life and traditional occupations; he ignored the beginnings of tourism, which was bringing people to the navigable waters of the Broads. Emerson's pictures emphasized the unchanged relationship of people to the land. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 171*]

Emerson was known as an eccentric art celebrity, whose ideas and work were controversial. When he rejected his own theory in a black-boardered pamphle titled The Death of Naturalistic Photography (1890), the public was skeptical. Yet Emerson maintained that his early theory was based on a belief that Tones in a photograph could be manipulated to a greater degree than chamists now proved possible. Many people today find Emerson's rationale insufficient. Having promoted art photography as a cutting-edge application of recent science, he seems to have abruptly cast it off because he saw it as limiting the individuality of the artist. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 171-172*]

### **Pictorialism**

Although Emerson wrote that he thought much amateur and art photography pretentious, many pratitioners ignored his insults, and based their ideas of art photography on his photographs, with their subdued middle-gray tones, soft focus, and peaceful, agrarian subjects. Amateurs of art photogarphy creatively misunderstood Emerson's writings to authorize moving away from faithful depiction toward more evocative and expressive photographs. The resulting internation photorgaphic movement known as Pictorialism gathered strength in the mid-1880s, peaked in the 1900s, and persisted into the 1920s. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 172*]

Pictorialists adopted Emerson's disgust with industralization and mass-produced goods, as well as his belief in photography as a fully fledged modern art form. They embraced his choice of subjects, but jettisoned allegiance to recent science. In pictorialist hands, Emerson's selective or differential focus became a dislike of the distracting details associated with vulgar commercial photography. Pictorialist photographers favored scences infused with fog and shadows. In contrast to their simple subjects, they strove for tonal complexity, choosing techniques such as platinum printing, which yielded abundant soft, middle-gray tones. They favored procedures that allowed for handworking of both negatives and prints. Their results were in obvious visual opposition to the sharp black-and-white contrast of the commercial print. Pictorialist photographs were frequently printed on textured paper, unlike the glossy surface of commercial photographs, so that they resembled watercolors, evoking the earlier Victorian photographs of David Octavius Hill and Julia Margaret Cameron, which they admired. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 172*]

Pictorialists valued their symbolic control over the growing photography industry, and they cultivated a sense of superiority over the snapshooters, who did not even develop their own film. Pictorialist writing encouraged a self-image of cultural heroism, striking back at the worst of the modern world. In his influential 1901 book _Photography as Fine Art_, critic Charles H. Caffin described the "men and women who are seeking to lift photography to the level of one of the Fine Arts" as "advanced photographers," and Alfred Stieglitz as an "artist, prophet, pathfinder." [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 172*]

As Emerson's justification of selective focus faded from currency, the writings of Henry Peach Robinson, which Emerson strongly disliked, were devoured by a new generation. Robinson, best known for his **Combination Prints**, was probably even more responsible for popularizing the work "pictorial" than Emerson. His book _Pictorial Effect in Photography_, first published in 1868, was still read at the turn of the century. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 172*]

To Emerson's annoyance, another British photographer, George Davison, expanded upon his theories and promoted an imprecise notion of impressionistic photography. Where as Impressionism, the French art movement of the 1870s-80s, aimed at capturing a momentary visual imprint of a scene, impressionistic photography attempted to render a personal response to a subject. Soon the words "poetic", "art", "naturalistic", and "impressionistic" all came to signal Pictorialist photography. Unlike Emerson's work, where the main subject was in focus, the entire surface of Davison's phoptograph _The Onion field_ is indistinct. Davison thus shifted the foundations of art photography from science to art. Paradoxically, the anti-industrial, hand-crafted photographs of the Pictorialist movement helped foster a new segment of photographic manufacturing. Commercial producers rushed to make soft-focus lenses and textured photographic papers for amateur use. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 173*]

Emerson's renunciation of naturalistic photography did not stop him making the pictures or criticizing the growing popularity of the **Gum-bichromate process**, which made it possible to add pigment and texture to a print. Other figures who experienced with pictorialist photography:

- Robert Demachy: promoted the gum bichromate technique in influential articles and worked extensively in it.
- Heinrich Kuhn: like Emerson, he was a scientist and a doctor, but his training did not lead him to a scientifically based theory of art.
- Frank Eugene: sometimes combined photography and print-making. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 173*]

Like Art Nouveau artists in Europe and America, the Pictorialists raised aesthetic experience to a paramount life goal. From their point of view, what was needed was aesthetic reform of the whole society, and they hoped to start the process by banishing the harsh and unsightly realm of industry from their work. The Pictorialist movement was string in Russia, where Sergei Lobovikov adopted it to render traditional life, not as ethnographic data, but as an expression of nostalgia for nature and simpler times. He worked with gum bichromate and made platinum plates, and he also favored the **Bromoil process** which allowed him to apply color to the print with a brush. In Japan the Pictorialist look dominated portraits, street scenes, landscapes, and ethnographic photographic until the mid-1930s, when it finally gave way to the pressures of Modernism and abstraction. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 174*]

> The principle that one should beautify the experience of everyday life, was promoted by the Arts and Crafts movement and the followers of Art Nouveau.

## **Modern life**

In the last decades of the 19th century, photography was no longer associated with new and sudden social shifts. Instead, the modern world was denoted by a quickening of technological and scientific progress, the increased consequence of urban life, and patterns of **life and labor** that involved **mass manufacturing**. The notion of change infiltrated modern life, and encouraged **social reform movements** in which photographs played a major role. Photographs became part of statistical reports and emotional pleas for urban improvement. They helped to produce **visual archives**, not only of substandard living conditions, but also of criminals. Photography was not simply used to verify what could be seen, but also to prove what the eye could not see. In Europe and the US, photographs recorded physical movements too swift and subtle for the human eye. WW1, which ended the era, was the first industrialized war. Professional, amateur, and soldier photographers used their cameras to record the boredom and horror of the trenches. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 203*]

### **The modern city**

Pictorial photographers occasionally photographed the urban environment, modifying it with a mantle of color or cloude. Photographers independant of Pictorialism also rendered the city and its inhabitants. British photographer Paul Martin recorded street life and seaside entertainment in a casual style associated with the snapshot. E. Alice Austen photographed the social life of her genteel friends, but also ventured into Manhattan to photograph immigrant life. Neither photographer's work was ever aimed at bringing about social improvements. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 203*]

New York City, especially after the opening of Ellis Island in 1892, was the port through which most of the immigrants entering the US passed. In 1900, over 35% of the population in big cities such as New York and Chicago was foreign born. Immigrant neighborhoods became the subject of much public curiosity and concern. Photographers in expanding American cities provided public with an array of images of the poor. Underwood and Underwood issued boxed sets of stereographs depicting immigrants and urban life. Some pictures reinforced ethnic stereotypes and cliches about urban workers and the poor. In his book _Street Types of Great American Cities_ (1982), Sigmund Krausz paired popular poetry and prose with his photographs. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 203-204*]

The rural poor were not major photographic subjects, outside the idyllic scenes produced by Pictorialist photographers. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 204*]

#### **Social reform photography**

From the beginning, British suffragists used photography to record the lives of poor women and children, arguing that giving women the vote would draw more attention to the issue of poverty. After a slow start, reform organizations and settelment houses - privately run charities that did social work among the poor - began using photography to promote their work. As social work moved from voluntary occupation to full-time professional employment, photogarphs were increasingly used in conjuction with other data. As the public became more familiar with photographs of the poor, there were two unexpected consequences:

1. Repeated images of people in squalid conditions bolstered stereotypes of the poor as inferior;
2. What is now called **compassion fatigue** set in, as happened toward the end of the American Civil War when, as photographic coverage increased, public response declined. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 204-205*]

Photographs of the poor were still novel and engaging when Jacob Riis produced his book _How the Other Half Lives_ (1980) which contained 15 half-tone images, and 43 drawings based on photographs. Like many reformers, Riis believed that individuals were formed by their environment. For him the crowded, unsanitary tenements were tha cause of crime and moral decay. By contemporary standards, Riis was conservative in his suggestions for reform: he did not call for government intervention, but hoped that the wealthy would consider tenement construction as a work of charity and that private investors would take less profit when building tenements, in order to provide adequate lodgings. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 205*]

Like many social observers, Riis implicitely divided the poor into two categories: deserving and undeserving. Women and small children often fitted the first category, with unemployed and criminally inclined males in the second. Oddly enough, Riis's photographs have come to stand for late 19th and early 20th century social reform. Nevertheless, the era embraced many modes of reform photography. Also often overlooked are the photographs made by American novelist and avid amateur photographer Jack London for _The People of the Abyss_ (1903), his account of the slums of London's East End. He used photographs, mostly his own, to depict the effects of industrialization on the poor, and to conclude that criminal mismanagement of society was to blame for poverty. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 205*]

In 1909, social photographer Lewis Hine suggested to the National Conference of Charities that workers be encouraged to photograph their own situations. The idea of worker photography later briefly took hold in Europe, between the WWs. The turn of the 20th century was an active time for the formation of labor unions in industrialized nations, but there was no systematic network to distribute photographs recording labor grievances, or offering union interpretations of the many labor actions and strikes that took place. As historian Larry Peterson observed: "Worker's organizations adopted photography more slowly and haltingly than corporations." He contended that even such militant new unions as the International Workers of the World failed to adopt the mass media publicity techniques associated with corporations. Instead, labor groups promoted craft skills and art historical knowledge because they were thought to stimulate the mind and the feelings. There was no extensive photographic protest showing workers trying to keep pace with speeded-up assembly lines, or learning to perform repetitive actions more quickly. More often than not, it was newspaper photographs of labor confrontations, not photographs taken by the unions, that galvanized worker opinions. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 208*]

Industry, by contrast, used photography to present a positive vision of the comnpany to the workers. _The Story of the Pullman Car_ (1917) contained 34 photographs describing the work of the company, and the company newspaper, the _Pullman Car Works Standard_ (1916-19) presented the company as Pullman's "Big Family" to the public and employees. Companies used their financial resources and ready access to the factory floor to make photographs that serverd their interests; images of admirable working conditions and engineering feats were encouraged in the press. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 208*]

The paternalistic attitude toward workers that developed in some factories was exeplified in the Ford Motor Company's booklet _Helpful Hints and Advice to Employes_ (1915), which contained photographs showing proper living conditions for a Ford worker. The company's sociological department took photographs of ideal kitchens and bathrooms as examples to workers, and hired about 100 inspectors to check employees' homes. More benignly, the General Electric Company began publishing a magazine called _Work News_, which emphasized the notion of community through photographs of workers and company sports teams. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 209*]

### **Science and photography**

#### **The photography of movement**

In 1878, French physiologist Etienne-Jules Marey was reading a science journal when he came across images derived from photorgaphs taken by Eadweard Muybridge. Muybridge's photographs resolved an age-old question for equine experts and painters: do all four legs of the hourse leave the ground when the horse moves quickly? To make the photographs, muybridge lined a raceway with 15-foot-wide sheeting, upon which lines where drawn at 21-inch intervals. As a horse rushed past, its hooves tripped cotton threads, which in turn tripped shutters on 12 cameras set up opposite the sheeting. Marey, who had been studying human and animal locomotion for a decade, was motivated by the Muybridge images to experiment with photography. In the early 1880s, he invented a gun-camera with which he made exposures rapid enough to record the bodily movements of a bird in flight. Marey's work was greatly aided by the speed of **Dry-plate** technology, which made possible the fast exposure time necessary to make instantaneous photographs. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 210*]

Another of Marey's inventions used a simple but elegant addition to the camera that let him record the flow of human and animal movement on a single photographic plage. The result showed human movement in time and space. Marey called his work chronophotography - that is, time photography. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 211*]

Marey's images are visually puzzling and attractive, yet he was primarily interested not in their aesthetic merit, but in the way in which they isolated the imperceptible phases of movement. He continued to improve his photographic devices so that he could eliminate any over-lapping of moveing figures. He created a camera in which light-sensitive material moved with each exposure. When continuous photographic film, like that used today, was invented, Marey employed it to produce a short film in July 1889, showing how the human hand works. He published his results in articles and books, notably in _The Flight of Birds_ (1890), which influenced early attempts to build airplanes. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 211*]

The photographer Albert Londe, who worked with Charcot at La Salpetriere during the 1880s, extended his medical photography into the creating of X-ray photographs and the study of movement. A line drawing by Paul Richer, based on one of Londe's stop-action photographs, may have provided the visual vocabulary for _Nude Descending a Staircase # 2_, the influential painting by Marcel Duchamp. Perhaps the greatest effect in the art world of late 19th century photographs of movement was on the Italian **Futurists**, who came to prominence in 1909. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 211*]

As his fame and influence grew, Muybridge became a science celebrity, traveling and giving lectures. One of Muybridge's supporters at the university of Pennsylvania was the American realist painter Thomas Eakins. An accomplished amateur photographer, Eakins used Muybridge's photographs in both his teaching and his art to show how humans and animals actually moved. By belinding scientific accuracty with artistc color and composition, Eakins made his point that **modern art had to take the findings of science into account**. He later lost interest in perfecting photographs of human movement. Eakins used outdoor photographs of the nude male for his paintings, both as figure studies and to learn how sunlight illuminates the body. Recent research indicates that he sometimes projected photographs on to his canvases and traced the outlines of forms, a practice occasionally used to create charcoal and painted portraits from photographic sources. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 211, 213*]

After setting up a studio in the zoological gardens, Muybridge recorded the movements of such animals as elks, camels, and elephants. His 11-volume work _Animal Locomotion_ (1887) offered 781 large plates. The studies attracted a varied audience, including prominent scientists such as Louis Agassiz, inventors such as Thomas Edison, and artists including Auguste Rodin. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 213*]

Directly or indirectly, chronophotographs influenced art. Most immediately, such artists as the French painter Jean-Louis-Ernest Meissonier and Thomas Eakins, both of whome carried out their own motion studies, made their paintings of horses accord with what the photographs showed, rather than with what the eye perceived. At the same time, each painter recognized how the human brain confirms the truth of optical realism, and adapted science to art. These modifications were seen by some critics as a capitulation to the machine. As stop-action photographs became known outside the scientific circles, they fueled the discussion about **the role of human perception in modern art**. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 213-214*]

### **Photography, social science, and exploration**

While art photography was influenced by science and technology, travel, exploration, survey, and social-scientific photography continued patterns set in the mid-19th century. The encyclopedic urge to collect images was newly invigorated by the growing sense that traditional life around the world was disappearing so rapidly that it must be recorded. Roland Bonaparte commissioned thousands of photographs around the world, and photographer John Thomson wrote in 1885, "no expedition, indeed, now-a-days, can be considered complete without photography to place on record the geographical and ethnological features of the journey. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 217*]

Official expeditions set out to clarify national and regional borders, as well as to research roadways, railroads, and resources. As in the mid-19th century, the camera and the gun were accepted equipment for the journey. Likewise, the classification of human types through physical differences continued apace, aspiring to become ever more comprehensive. In short, while photographic realism was hotly debated in art circles, the medium's objectivity was increasingly central to social science. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 217*]

#### **Criminal likenesses**

During the 1880s, photographs of criminals became routine in police work. In the past, the camera had been used occasionally to record the appearance of suspects and criminals. In the 1850s, the Swiss government used it to register indigents and stateless persons, and Alexander Gardner made portraits of President Lincoln's assassins and of their execution. In the late 19th century, the photography of criminals became as standardized as anthropological photography, largely because of the work of Paris police official Alphonse Bertillon. Son of Louis Adolphe Bertillon, a well-known anthropometrician who used statistics to describe the humankind, Alphone Bertillon developed a verbal and visual system to describe criminals. His main interest was to identify recidivists. Called "speaking likenesses," Bertillon's invention was what is known today as the **mugshot**. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 220, 223*]

Breaking down physical appearances into small, standardized units allowed unskilled clerks to file and retrieve criminal photographs. The creation of large information archives, such as those used in police work, strengthened **government control** of the populace and, with anthropological photography, came close to fulfilling the abiding 19th century dream of a vast, **encyclopedic collection** of images. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 223*]

Bertillon's publications influenced criminology and police procedures around the world. They fitted into an existing trend that saw criminality as evidence of degenration - that is, of faulty innate tendencies in the individual brought out by the pressures of modern society. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 223*]

# **A new vision**

In the 1920s, the industrialization of photography reached a new level, with the expansion of newspapers, general and special-interest magazines, and professional periodicals, all of which employed **photomechanical means of reproducing images**. In addition, the automatic photo machine, better known as the photo booth, was patented in 1928 and first set up in New York City's theater district, where it became immensly popular. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 233*]

By 1920, there were about 10 million registered automobiles in the US, and automobile production was about to become one of the nation's leading industries. By 1920, there were 7.5 million telephones in the US, while there were only 1 million in 1900. Widespread electrifictaion made possible radio stations and home radio receivers. Especially in European art movements, **photographic realism** was associated with the forces that culminated in WW2. The psychological devastation in the wake of the war seemed to clear a path of **experimental and non-linear art**. Clear subject matter and tidy compositions were critiqued and challenged by **abstract images** in which flat planes, strange shapes, and irrational shadows perplexed simple understanding. Experimental art broke out of the sedate gallery and into small, but widely circulated **avant-garde publication**. Advertising for upscale consumer items employed what was called the **new vision**, to glamorize products. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 233*]

The sustained world economic and industrial growth of the 1920s ended abruptly in 1929. In the US, the stock market crash on October 24, 1929, wiped out over 60% fo the value of securities, and set off a chain reaction of bank failures, factory shut-downs, and mortgage foreclosures. Franklin D. Roosevelt came to the American presidency with a broad series of recovery plans collectively known as the New Deal. Roosevelt, as was keenly aware of maintaining public faith in his good health, banned photographs showing him in his wheelchair. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 233*]

In the US, the **Depression** challenged the notion of America as a land of limitless opportunitiy for those willing to roll up their sleeves and work. As hard times were gradually perceived as an enduring, not temporary experience, many photographers relaxed the stiff graphics of Modernist photography and adapted them to interpretations of how people now lived. The clear close-ups of troubled faces, angled pictures of ragged breadlines, and angry contrasts between poverty and wealth were frequently called **documentary photographs**. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 233*]

The outbreak of WW2 in Europe and the entry of the US into the conflict were well recorded by the camera. The work of war photographers was carefully censored. In response, image-makers took to recording the daily life and war experience of soldiers and civilians. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 233*]

# **Through the lense of culture**

While postwar Europe and Asia staggered under the loss of millions of people, coupled with economic devastation, the US, which did not suffer physical damage on its mainland, emerged as the world's leading industrial and military power. By 1947, the relief and unity felt by the Allies after their victory in WW2 had given way to a world polarized by the Cold War. Beginning in 1945, the Soviet Union established its influence among eastern European nations in the territories previously occupied by Nazi Germany. In addition, the Soviets administered eastern Germany. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 310*]

When the Soviet Union and the eastern European nations in its sphere of influence refused rebuilding funds under the Marshal Plan, suspicion of Soviet long-term expansionist intentions rapidly spread in the West. Fired by the fear that its wartime ally wanted to spread communism througout the world, and that the human misery of the immediate postware period would make such a message attractive, the US redoubled its economic aid to European and some Middle Eastern countries. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 310*]

WW2 erased any doubt that global forces affect all nations and regions. The word 'globalization', showed up in dictionaries and ordinary parlance during the 1960s. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 310*]

Like other media of expression, photographic practice was caught up in the cross-currents of postwar upheavals and crises. The 'Family of Man' exhibition at the MoMA expressed a unity among the world's people that went beyond political differences. In the US, images from the assassinations of Robert F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King quickly became part of the nation's collective visual memory. Filmmakers and photogarphers not only recorded, but were part of, the 1968 uprising in France and the Warsaw Pact's invasion of Czechoslovakia. The medium aided the beginnings of what would eventually be called identity politics, when photogarphers chose as topics cultural distinctiveness and idiosyncratic behavior. Similarly, postwar anxieties about spiritual life in an age of material abundance were captured by the lens. In the US, the Civil Rights movement and reactions to the war in Vietnam were photographed, and shown not only in newspapers and magazines, but on television, which quickly became the medium through which average people learned the news. At the same time, photography was adopted by artists who cared less about the medium's historical attempts to join the fine arts and more about its potential to create images whose objectivity accorded with Conceptualism. The distinction between art photogarphers and artists who use photography continued througout the 20th century, as notions of multimedia expressions gained currency. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 310*]

# **Convergences**

The worldwide convergence of political accords, economic networks, and cultural creations has been escalating for about five hundred years. Nevertheless, people living in the last decades of the 20th century experienced a globalization that outpaced the past. Advances in communications expedited commercial and cultural exchanges to the speed of computers. The integration of financial markets and trade agreements, such as happened in the European Union, stimulated the production and sale of consumer goods, and made **globalization** a key marketing term. Record numbers of skilled workers and manual laborers migrated around the world in search of employment. This unprecedented international **mobility of people, money, and materials** was a key function of globalization, which also encouraged a **transnational perspective** on issues such as global warming. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 392*]

The decline of the picture magazine after WW2, and the concomitant rise of **television news**, shrank the number of outlets available for documentary and photojournalistic images. Newspaper and magazine photo editors increasingly prescribed the exact subject and style they wanted from photographs, thereby cramping the individual initiative of photojournalists. Even more than in the past, editors rather than photographers chose which, if any, of the images submitted would be published. Yet as newspapaers and magazines called for fewer photographs, the possibilities to publish images on the web greatly multiplied. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 392*]

Culturally, globalization saw some **national and ethnic cultural practices** being amalgamated into internationally appreciated forms. **Conceptual art**, a movement that originated in North America and Europe during the 1960s, had been disseminated around the world by the 1980s. Conceptualism's emphasis on **art as idea** continues to be expressed in photography, film, and video, and has proved adaptable to specific circumstances. As Cristina Vives Gutierrez observed, Conceptualism is an attitude about the **function of art**, not a clearly identifiable visual style; Its manifestations can be remarkably diverse. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 392*]

The gradual amalgamation of **art photogarphy** and **photojournalism** begun in the 20th century continues in the 21st, aided by the ongoing spread of electronic means of communication. **Screen culture**, once a term in art theory, has been realized in the daily experience of most people. Photography has become immaterial - that is, decreasingly printed for everyday use. News-based websites expand access to the shots taken by a photogarpher on assignment and by a citizen who happens to have a camera-phone or digital camera. Around the world, camera-phone images, whose low resolution makes them poor candidates for printing, are beamed from person to person. The proliferation of digital cameras and easy uplinks to the internet have created more photographers than ever before. [*Cultural History of Photography - Mary Warner Marien, 392*]
